{"lc": 1, "type": "constructor", "id": ["langchain", "schema", "document", "Document"], "kwargs": {"metadata": {"doc_id": "3b85cf71-8248-440c-8205-005e2a67db67"}, "page_content": "4.2 Implications and future work\n\nWhile acknowledging these limitations, our analysis reveals several key implications for how we study and respond to AI\u2019s economic effects.\n\nComparison to predictive studies Our empirical findings both validate and challenge previous predictions about AI\u2019s impact on work. Webb [2019] predicted highest AI exposure in occupations around the 90th wage percentile, while we find peak usage in mid-to-high wage occupations, with notably lower usage at both extremes of the wage distribution. This pattern suggests that factors beyond technical feasibility\u2014such as implementation costs, regulatory barriers, and organizational readiness\u2014may be tempering adoption in the highest-wage sectors. Eloundou et al. [2023] predicted that 80% of U.S. workers could have at least 10% of their work tasks affected by language models;\n\n8See Appendix E for exact date ranges.\n\n12\n\nby contrast, our empirical data shows current adoption at \u223c57% of occupations using AI for at least 10% of their tasks\u2014lower than predicted but potentially trending toward their forecast as capabilities improve and adoption barriers decrease. However, their prediction of higher usage in industries like healthcare has not yet materialized in our data, and we observe noticeably higher usage in scientific applications than they expected, highlighting the impact of both sector-specific barriers to diffusion as well as unexpected developments in model capabilities. These discrepancies between predictions and actual usage underscore the importance of empirical measurement in understanding AI\u2019s evolving economic impact and suggest that technical feasibility alone may not be sufficient to predict where and how AI will be adopted across the economy.\n\nDynamic tracking of AI usage Our research provides a framework for systematically tracking AI\u2019s integration into the workforce over time. Unlike surveys that capture self-reported behavior, our approach reveals actual AI usage patterns as they naturally occur in the workplace, providing a more accurate and granular picture of true integration. This ability serves multiple crucial functions: it enables early detection of emerging usage patterns, helps identify sectors approaching technological inflection points, and reveals where adoption barriers may be creating uneven diffusion across industries. By monitoring both the breadth (across occupations) and depth (within specific roles) of AI usage, policymakers can develop targeted interventions\u2014whether supporting sectors showing promising (or lagging) productivity gains or addressing potential displacement effects in areas of rapid automation. A dynamic measurement system provides critical lead time for policymakers and organizations to prepare for technological transitions, rather than responding reactively after disruptions have already occurred.\n\nTask-level measurement Our findings highlight the importance of analyzing AI use at the task level rather than at the job level. Currently, we observe usage concentrated in specific tasks (e.g., software engineering, content creation) rather than wholesale automation of occupations. If this pattern persists\u2014with AI affecting only a subset of tasks within jobs\u2014it suggests occupations will evolve rather than disappear. However, if the breadth of task usage grows without signs of saturation, that may suggest the possibility of a more comprehensive workplace transition.\n\nAugmentation vs automation Within affected tasks, the way AI systems are used can differ significantly. Our analysis reveals an important distinction: while some users employ AI systems to completely automate tasks, others use them as collaborative tools that enhance their capabilities. This difference matters for both workers and productivity. When AI serves as an augmentative partner rather than a replacement, studies have shown improved productivity while maintaining individuals\u2019 meaningful engagement in their work [Noy and Zhang, 2023, Peng et al., 2023, Cui et al., 2024]. These patterns can inform policy priorities\u2014supporting the development of collaborative AI interfaces where they show clear benefits, while ensuring appropriate preparation for areas where automation becomes more prevalent.\n\nFrom usage patterns to broader impacts Understanding how current AI usage patterns may translate into broader economic changes remains a key challenge. While our data reveals where AI is being used today, inferring long-term consequences from these early usage trends poses significant empirical challenges [Acemoglu et al., 2022]. For instance, high usage in certain occupations could signal future productivity gains or displacement effects, while the uneven distribution of AI use across wage levels may offer early indicators of how AI could reshape economic opportunities and inequalities. While our present results cannot definitively map these relationships, longitudinal analysis tracking both usage patterns and outcomes could help reveal the mechanisms by which AI usage drives changes in the workplace.\n\nOverall, our findings demonstrate that AI has already begun to see use across a significant fraction of economic tasks. We offer this initial framework for tracking AI\u2019s evolving impact on work as a starting point, and hope to partner with policymakers, economists, and other stakeholders to develop policy proposals that will spread the benefits of AI across the economy.\n\n13", "type": "Document"}}